Subject:  Viridian Note 00030: The View From EcotopiaKey concepts:  Weather violence, clean energy, industrial policy, Washington State, media coverageAttention Conservation Notice:  It's about regional American politics and state-centered industrial policy.  Grim assessment, can cause feelings of despair.  Direct from Wonkville.Entries in the Viridian "Fungal Typography" Contest:http://members.aol.com/stjude/http://www.saunalahti.fi/~jtlin/viridian/Sources:  Seattle Times, Thursday, December 3, 1998; patmazza@teleport.com^^^*  (Patrick Mazza)   Patrick Mazza is senior writer-researcher for Atmosphere Alliance, an environmental/industrial policy group based in Olympia, Washington.  The book NINE NATIONS OF NORTH AMERICA, by journalist and urban theorist Joel Garreau, once described Mr. Mazza's area of the continent as "Ecotopia."  Green political sentiment is powerful in the Pacific Northwest, and better yet, they have big, sophisticated, cybernetic industries that aren't tied at the wrists and ankles to smokestacks.  Mr. Mazza has some interesting insights and approaches to offer us.   (((Parenthetical comments by bruces@well.com.)))Patrick Mazza remarks:The European insurance companies have been out in front on climate change, while we have not heard much from U.S. companies. Reason? Federal flood insurance. Here, we socialize the losses, insure the uninsurable, so they can build again on their floodplains.((("America:  More Socialist Than Europe."  Call the newspapers.)))     Here, in the heart of the problem, the USA, the source of 1/4 of the world's greenhouse gases, our wealth masks the consequences.  The feedback loop does not connect. It does in places such as Bangladesh and Central America, where the perception that this is a stable, safe world is long gone, if it ever was there in the first place. But it is not the perceptions of those people that count. It is the perceptions of the people here, in the insulated rich world.(((Well put, though it's not our "perceptions" that are emitting the carbon dioxide.  Mostly, it's our wall-plugs and gas pedals.)))    So what will break the spell? Perhaps an Andrew, Hugo, Mitch and Camille hitting the US mainland in one year. Perhaps a several year drought in the Midwest that, as it did in the late '80s, reduces US grain production below consumption. Grain reserves around 1995 were at a record low, and accelerating global population keeps pressuring them.(((Last time the carbon-dioxide spell was broken was during the Great Depression, when there was a sustained dip in CO2 emissions because everybody was broke and in the streets.  If we are enduring biblical catastrophes and famines of the kind you are suggesting here, we're not going to be sustaining today's booming consumer economy.  That will be over.  We'll be living in a post-catastrophe emergency regime.  Paradise for eco-regulators maybe, but no picnic for the rest of us.)))      The new stats for the 97-98 El Nino are $33 billion in losses (something like 1.3 percent of Gross World Product), 20,000 deaths, 120,000 injuries and 5 million displaced. It caused apocalyptic fires in Indonesia, Brazil, Mexico and Florida, droughts and killer heat waves in Texas and Africa, monstrous flooding in Peru. Sometimes in the media reports the El Nino connection was made. Sometimes it wasn't. But only rarely was the possible connection between El Nino and global warming drawn. There is a crucial disconnect, a place the feedback loop is being broken. The media holds a critical responsibility for alerting the public to the connection between the weather disruptions it reports and the probable connection of the overall pattern to greenhouse gas emissions. It is failing. A movement of artists and communicators must fill that gap.    (((This connection isn't hard to find in the media.  It's all over the place  (though I can't help but notice that the various media-cited 1998 catastrophe statistics vary by whole orders of magnitude).  I suspect that the tactics of the GCC  will shift soon, from their current bland denial of global warming, to the vigorous assertion that global warming is real and is *good for us.* Farfetched?  Wait and see.    (((Speaking as an "artist and communicator," I would like to take this moment to formally declare myself "the media."  We've all got modems, there's a new century at hand, so let's put our cards on the table and all be "media" from now on.   Every attack I've ever seen against "the media" involves people who are already "media" by any sane definition, and who are anxious to seize more attention and bandwidth at the expense of rival users of "media."  Louche, irresponsible, scandal-hungry, trivial, stumbling blindly toward catastrophe, firmly in the pockets of corporate interests == that's not "the media", that's an honest portrait of global humanity.)))   (((Mr. Mazza has also seen fit to favor us with a copy of his recent op-ed piece in the *Seattle Times,* which is a swell piece of rhetorical work, even though Mr. Mazza is himself, apparently, not "media."  Some excerpts follow.)))    Washington, D.C., is demonstrating it's not up to seriously addressing global warming. But states are beginning to fill the leadership vacuum by seizing the tremendous economic opportunities of the coming clean-energy revolution.     The U.S. fossil fuel industry and its allies depict serious emissions reductions as economically disastrous. Precisely the opposite is true. Converting the energy system, now the major greenhouse gas source, to climate-friendly energy is one of the great economic opportunities of the 21st century.(((I can only agree.  It's got to happen one way or the other == the only question is how gray and smelly the sky gets, first.)))     Even now, solar and wind are the world's fastest-growing energy sources, each growing over 25 percent annually. Increased production  is generating economies of scale that lower prices and enlarge the market, such as has occurred with computer chips. Shell researchers conservatively project clean sources could supply half the world's energy by 2050. The key issue is whether clean energy will ramp up fast enough to stave off global warming.(((Absolutely, man!  Ramp up faster!  Let's hear it for those righteous fellow-travellers at Shell (http://www.shell.com)!)))   This is why public support is crucial.(((Huh?  Why bring the public into this?  You just admitted that the US government is utterly hopeless.)))    Driven by national security  concerns, onetime infant aerospace and computer industries were built into giants by military and space programs. Climatic disruption is as genuine a security threat as we've ever faced. Clean energy is our frontline defense, and should gain the same kind of boost.(((Rather than re-routing the Pentagon's Cold War money into the pockets of postindustrial Greens, wouldn't it be simpler for you to just *join the army?*  After all, if we hit the wall with a genuine eco-catastrophe, you'll have plenty of company in uniform.  We'll all be drafted, and heaving sandbags at the angry rising foam.)))     The Europeans and Japanese are nurturing their clean-energy firms.(((Now this rhetorical tactic could *work.*  "We must close the solar-panel gap with the Germans!"  Cold War II, here we come!  War is the health of the state, not to mention the health of Boeing and General Dynamics.)))     California is spending one-half billion dollars on its clean-energy companies. Washington (((state))) also has the stuff to be a global contender.(((Don't feel badly, Europeans; we'll pick a fight with California, if we have to!)))     The state is already a budding clean-energy Silicon Valley boasting hundreds of companies grossing nearly $1 billion annually. We are the world production center for the electronic systems that all solar panels need to feed electricity into homes and power grids. At its Vancouver, Wash., plant, Siemens, the world's top solar company, refines the silicon from which it makes all its solar cells.  Applied Power Corporation of Lacey is a finalist to build the world's largest  solar power plant.(((Why not cut the government entirely out of the feedback loop, and just buy stock in Siemens, Applied Power, and Shell?  Let's make friends with their on-staff industrial designers.  Let's ask them to design something sexier.)))     Washington's substantial clean-energy industry has huge potential for cross-fertilization with its world-leading high-tech firms. Asia, our primary trade partner, represents the largest potential new clean-energy market. As the industry grows, solar energy equipment could easily join apples, airliners and software as signature Washington products. But to secure our position, we need five elements of public support:* A clean energy investment fund - to match California's - created by a surcharge on electricity shipped through power lines;* Economic-development priority given to clean-energy firms;* A clean-energy R&D initiative by the state's public and private institutions;* High-visibility clean-energy equipment purchases by government;* Direct cash assistance for private clean-energy equipment  purchases.(((If it were up to me, I'd kick the props out from under the carbon industry's subsidies *before* I tried to build new subsidies for solar.  This is where you find the missing element in this article: genuine market-demand for renewable energy.  It may be politically easier to ask for a new little solar pork-barrel than it is to demolish a gigantic, time-honored carbon one.  It badly needs to be done,though, and would save us a lot of money.  But even German Greens fear the coal-miners.)))     We must aggressively shift our public policies to favor clean energy. With so little leadership coming from Washington, D.C., it is time for this Washington to lead the clean-energy revolution that is the only hope for avoiding a disastrous disruption of the world's climate.  (((The clean-energy revolution will never happen if it's "the only hope."  It has to happen because it's *attractive.*  It smells better.  It tastes better.  It's more romantic, it's sexier. It's gizmos are cooler and more sophisticated than big, crude, greasy gizmos.  It doesn't kill you stone-dead if you turn it on and sit  inside its garage for half-an-hour.  It's *prettier.*  It is an artifact of a more advanced, more beautiful world.  Dare I say it?  It's Progress.)))Patrick Mazza (patmazza@teleport.com^^^*)