Subject: Viridian Note 00049:  Submerging CarbonKey concepts:  Algae, carbon sequestration, genetic engineering, mega-projectsAttention Conservation Notice:  It's a mad, world-altering scheme that sounds seductively rational on a sentence-by-sentence basis.Links: www.bespoke.org/viridian (the long-awaited bespoke.orgdigital art gallery is now open)Entries in the Viridian Teapot Design Contest:I just got off the plane and don't have time to post them yet.  Because I'm getting back on a plane tomorrow morning.  Due to the Pope-Emperor's crushing travelrequirements, this contest's deadline will have to be extended.From: Jim_Hurst@kyrus.com^*  (Jim Hurst) Greetings.Some very interesting discussion going on.  To date, the Viridian proposals I've seen discussed are reacting to a greenhouse world.  This is fine, but it's only half the story.  Viridians should design large scale proposals to *reverse* greenhouse processes.    Industrial culture has dispersed many billions of tons of C02, along with various other insulating gases, into the atmosphere.  This poses questions:  how can we get this stuff out of the atmosphere?  And, once out, what do we do with the solid waste?    Carbon dioxide is ridiculously stable from a chemical engineering standpoint, but it possesses the interesting property of being a critical ingredient to the process of photosynthesis.  This means that we already have a wide spectrum of available bioreactors that can be used to scrub carbon from the atmosphere.  We possess centuries of expertise fine tuning these bioreactors, namely plants, thru agriculture.    But carbon sequestion is not your typical agriculture problem.  Agriculture, in  a free market society, uses valuable real estate and other inputs to produce things people want to buy.  It's not clear who's willing to pay for carbon sequestration, particularly on the massive scale required.     More troubling yet, how can we dispose of sequestered carbon in units of say, 6 billion tons? (If a ton is packed in a cubic meter, then we require six cubic kilometers of dump space == not exactly something for the local mini-storage).    After checking into a few likely storage sites (Nevada will take anything for a price), and pricing out the costs of transport and installation, it seems to me that the most cost-effective solution is the ocean floor.  Now, this poses certain political problems, but nice clean carbon, nicely packaged, over small parts of the deeper ocean floor, is not a doomsday scenario.    Due to transport costs, six billion tons of carbon destined for the ocean floor should be sunk on-site.  Therefore, the best existing sequestering organisms are ocean algae.  But existing algae don't meet Viridian goals.  Natural algae recycle nearly all the carbon they use, rather than neatly sinking it.       Viridian bioengineering must meet this challenge by designing algae that sequester carbon, perhaps along with certain amounts of silicates or other extracted heavier elements.  As the engineered algae matures, it gets heavier, but maintains buoyancy as kelp does, through flotation cells.  When it's mature, the flotation cells rupture, and our ocean floor carbon delivery vehicle sinks like a stone.    The Viridian CarbonSink Algae (tm) has some daunting technical requirements.      First, its reproductive ability must be controllable, since otherwise it might run amok in the hydrosphere.      Second, it will probably have to be artificially fertilized, since we're likely to grow it in barren parts of the ocean.  (It's not politically feasible to plant it in sea areas already heavily used for shipping and fishing.)     Third, this organism has to be engineered for tissue that contains considerable carbon, sinks on schedule, and is geologically stable under ocean floor conditions.      Fourth, it has to be aggressive enough to compete favorably with more traditional algae, inside its human designated and maintained zones.   The ocean is a large place.  Contemplating the ecological horror of floods and hurricanes makes it easy to accept CarbonSink zones as environmental sacrifice areas.  Large areas of the ocean are already biological deserts due to lack of available nutrients, so the CarbonSink zones needn't be environmentally malign.  A certain leakage into the food chain could be used for commercial aquaculture, which might be quite a plus in a world subject to drought in grain belts.Cheers,  Jim Hurst(((bruces remarks:  I do enjoy this sort of thing; there's nothing quite like a mathematically-literate counsel of despair.  The aspect I find hardest to swallow is the unmentioned Wellsian World Council of genetically-literate engineers who can somehow seize large areas of the oceans and turn them bright green with dying, rotting, sinking, gene-warped goop.  Surely it would be simpler and easier to divide this pressing task among six billion people. Let's just arrange for every man, woman, and child on the planet to accumulate and publicly display one ton of carbon.  I'm thinking, maybe carbon lawn-art: birdbaths, sprinklers, that kind of thing.)))Jim Hurst (Jim_Hurst@kyrus.com^*)