Subject:  Viridian Note 00009: The Science Press on Global Warming, RewrittenKey concepts:  global warming, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Viridian rhetoricAttention Conservation Notice:  contains a violent partisan attack; is almost 1,600 words longSources: NATURE Vol. 395, 22 October 1998, page 741Links:  www.nature.comwww.well.com/user/jonl/viridian/txt(Viridian Notes 00001-00006)In this Note, I am translating the "Commentary" article from Nature that was presented in Viridian Note 00008.Instead of remaining a sniveling emanation  of obscurantistclimate bureaucrats, it will be re-presented to the public in a lucid, vigorous Viridianese.   My rewrite appears in the customary (((triple parentheses)))."Adapting to the Inevitable"((("Our Timid Attempt To Avert Total Failure")))"Greenhouse-gas emissions targets to be discussed in Buenos Aires next month will have little effect on the potential impacts of climate change.  We should be exploring ways of adapting to impacts, some of which are inevitable."((("We'll be wasting everyone's time next month in Buenos Aires.  Instead of expecting us to carry out our duty and avert global climate disaster, you'd better rustle up some civil engineers and build a lot of dams.")))     "In Kyoto last December, at the third conference of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, targets were agreed for reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions.  On 2 November in Buenos Aires, negotiators will reconvene at the framework convention's fourth conference to agree the mechanisms and a timetable for implementation.  We shall be hearing a good deal about trading permits, compliance and enforcement in the weeks to come."((("Believe it or not, we are every bit as bored by this legalistic nonsense as you are.  More so, because we have to help negotiate it, even though we know full well that it's a useless sham.")))    "But in reality, the control of global warming achieved is very limited."((("Luckily, 'reality' is poorly understood by people who don't read NATURE.  Otherwise we IPCC experts would be risking arrest for criminal negligence.")))     "The Kyoto Protocol is an agreement to a 5.2 percent reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions by about 2010 (relative to 1990), and constant emissions thereafter."  ((("In other words, we've somehow agreed that it makes sense to spew trash into the atmosphere at the levels of 1988.  Every year from now on. Forever.")))  "But these targets only relate to the so-called annex 1 countries (38 industrialized nations).  These countries together account for about 57 percent of present global carbon emissions, but will produce only about 25 percent of the emissions growth over the next 20 years."   ((("We live in a country that's Annex 1.  It makes political sense to get our beloved Albion off the hook by blaming all the new guys for our problem.  Note the slick way we conflate *actual emissions* with emission *growth rates.*  Scientific diplomacy never fudges -- see, it's all right there in the statistics.")))     "Most future growth in emissions is expected to occur in the fast-developing regions of Asia and Latin America, which are not signatories to the framework convention."    ((("This just in!  Fantastic news!  Massive financial collapse in the formerly 'fast-developing regions' makes it mostly our responsibility after all!")))    "As a consequence, the Kyoto target itself does relatively little to combat the rate of climate change.   The warming expected by 2050, without any deliberate mitigation, is estimated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) at 1.4 degrees C with respect to the 1961-90 average.  About 0.25 degrees C of this has already been realized by the 1990s."   ((("Enjoying this year's droughts, storms and blazing rain forests?  We're less than one fifth of the way to the brave new world of 2050.")))   "Our model prediction suggests that fully implemented Kyoto targets would reduce this global warming by 2050 by only about 0.05 degrees C.  Even more radical targets, such as a 20 percent reduction in greenhouse-gas emissions from annex 1 countries, would reduce it by only a further 0.1 degrees C by 2050."  ((("The term 'radical' is best employed when discussing schemes for cutting CO2. Putting the planet at risk by  burning everything we canget our hands on  -- well, that's just not 'radical.'")))    "These minor reductions in the expected warming mean that the projected impacts of change are barely affected.  The global number of people put at increased risk of hunger, water shortage or coastal flooding during storms as a result of projected climate changes is hardly touched by the targets under discussion in Buenos Aires, even if full implementation of the targets is agreed there."  (...)     "The convention calls on signatories to take action to safeguard food security, ecosystems and sustainable development from dangerous levels of climate change.  But the current target does not do this.  This does not mean that we should despair, but it emphasizes two things."((("Well, let us be a little clearer about that statement == yes, we ARE despairing.  Despite its colorless tone, this Commentary of ours is a blatant counsel of despair.  The best scheme we could possibly negotiate will shelter you not at all.  Government has entirely failed this critical challenge.  International authority has failed.  Science has failed.  Diplomacy has failed.  Everything has failed but the insupportable, unsustainable, lethally dangerous status quo.  We were all sitting there on the IPCC blue-ribbon panel, and we are boldly confessing to you right here in NATURE that we have failed you, and that we see no real way forward. If you expect anything better from us in Buenos Aires, you must not be listening. Kyoto is a fraud, a political fig-leaf.  It's precisely 0.05 degrees C better than nothing at all.")))    "First, Kyoto and Buenos Aires are only the first steps in a process that must involve much greater reduction in emissions and also, crucially, the participation of developing countries."  ((("If there's anything left of them by then.")))  (...) "Second, mitigation by reducing greenhouse-gas emissions cannot be the entire response to the threat of climate change.  Given the long history of past emissions and the inertia of the climate system, we will experience a substantial amount of further climate change even if we make huge cuts."  ((("In other words, we're sunk already.  We're gonna catch it big-time.  We'd have been better off if we'd turned over every country on Earth to hippiefanatics back on Earth Day 1970. They probably would have made LSD mandatory, but at least they wouldn't have drowned London, San Francisco and Tokyo in pursuit of a fast buck.  One of their many Cassandra eco-assumptions is finally coming true.  It'll be as real as a baling-bucket full of floodwater in your face.")))    "We should, therefore, be thinking seriously about how we can best adapt to climate change."  ((("We treasure the illusion that other fields of human endeavor have more clout and competence than us meteorologists."))) (...)      "Adaptation has received very little attention  compared with mitigation.  That may be partly because to admit the need to adapt sounds defeatist to negotiators,"((("Do we have to SCREAM IT to you people?  We signed the IPCC report, we wrote it ourselves!  We're DEFEATED!  We've accomplished nothing of substance!  The peace and happiness of billions are at stake, but we scientists are having about as much effect on the course of events as Einstein did at Chernobyl.  You're on your own, suckers.")))   (...) "and also because adaptation seems more complicated than mitigation (emission sources are relatively few, but the array of adaptations is vast)."  ((("For example, traffic laws are difficult to pass and enforce, but there are literally thousands of ingenious ways to pry the injured and dead out of flaming multi-car pileups.")))      "Yet to ignore mitigation is both unrealistic and perilous."   ((("People will somehow be able to ignore blue skies that turn brown and gray, but their attention is sure to be keenly focussed on our well-meant civil-defence lectures.")))     (...)  "About 640 million people are at risk of hunger now.  Poverty is the root cause, but much of the year-to-year variability is due to drought.  By droughtproofing those at risk now we could secure their present livelihood and reduce the impact of future climate change."  ((("More dams, that's the secret.  We'll gloss over the fact that curtailing water supplies means species extinctions at unheard-of levels.  When we think of those legions of little kids lined up with their penny jars hoping they'll still have  a panda -- well, maybe we can teach them that it was a clever tech-fix to concrete the Yangtse.")))      "There are many kinds of such 'win-win' solutions that serve both our present and future needs, such as increasing irrigation efficiency, breeding more drought-resistant crops and developing buffer stocks of food."  ((("Get those civil contractors, xeno-biologists and genetic engineers on the job.  We climate types have shot our bolt.  We're next to useless.")))   (...)     "There is a risk that negotiators have lost sight of the ultimate objective of the convention which is to avoid dangerous levels of climate change."  ((("As for us, we're even worse off -- we've lost sight of our reason to live.  Luckily, it's not permitted to sob aloud in a scientific document.")))  "Current mitigation targets will not achieve this and should not be mistaken for effective climate management."  (("It's hard to mistake 'effective climate management' == because that's a chimera, a ludicrous neologism.  No group of  human beings has ever 'managed' the weather, and at the rate we're going, no one ever will.")))Bruce Sterling (bruces@well.com)