Subject:  Viridian Note 00031:  Self-destructive JunglesKey concepts:  drought, dying forests, burning forests, El Nino, CO2 load in biosphere, Chiapas Smoke PlumeAttention Conservation Notice:  Confuses the issue.  Oxymoronic.  Paradoxical.  Terrifying.  Hopefully, rather farfetched.Links: http://www.goes.noaa.gov/mexicofires.htmlhttp://pooh.esrin.esa.it:8080/ew/mexico.htmEntries in the Viridian "Fungal Typography" Contest:http://members.aol.com/stjude/http://www.saunalahti.fi/~jtlin/viridian/http://www.wenet.net/~scoville/Viridian/viridiantext.htmlSources:  Hanqin Tian, NATURE magazine (http://www.nature.com);Article by Joseph B. Verrengia, Associated PressAustin American Statesman, Dec. 17, 1998"Forests add greenhouse gases during El Nino, scientists say"By Joseph B. Verrengia  "Instead of inhaling extra carbon dioxide, Brazil's rain forest does the opposite in an El Nino year, exhaling millions of tons of the heat-trapping gas and potentially adding to global warming, scientists say.    "The rain forest, under normal conditions, acts as the 'lungs' of the planet.  Its thousands of square miles of trees release oxygen and absorb as much as 700 million tons of carbon dioxide a year.    "But when global climate conditions are scrambled by El Nino and the rain forest becomes parched, scientists from the Woods Hole Research Laboratory in Massachusetts determined, the Amazon Basin produces as much as 200 million tons of excess carbon dioxide a year.  The calculation by Hanqin Tian and others are published in today's issue of the journal NATURE."  (...)     "In the Amazon, it (((El Nino))) causes severe droughts.  Under such drought stress, the rain forest can't adequately photosynthesize and store carbon dioxide, Tian said."(((This grim discovery makes perfect sense, once you think about it.  No water, no photosynthesis.   No rain, no green.  Simple as that. And what does the Amazon jungle do then?  It coughs up a couple of hundred million tons.(((So much for the divine wisdom of Mother Nature.  Could it be that Gaia is even more wacky and shortsighted than we are?  Is she blindly willing to choke on her own spew just like the G-7 Advanced Industrial Nations?  Well, why not?  All the inhabitants of the biosphere have a perfect moral right to pitch right in and screw things up with us hominids.    (((Upon digesting this appalling news, I suppose we could swiftly muster the Kevin Kelly Memorial Bulldozer Brigade (see Viridian Note 00024) and dash out there to saw the jungle down before it does us even more harm than Exxon-Mobil.  But (a) we'll lose the benefit we get if we ever get another year that isn't an El Nino, (b) we probably need the oxygen even more urgently than we don't need the carbon dioxide, and (c) we needn't bother, because a parched rain forest will spontaneously *burn.*   Combustion is when forests really spew the soot, and they do themselves a level of harm that lumberjacks can only envy.  This blazing activity does not require any surprise discoveries by Woods Hole, and in fact it couldn't be more obvious, as the links in this Note suggest.(((These links,http://www.goes.noaa.gov/mexicofires.htmlhttp://pooh.esrin.esa.it:8080/ew/mexico.htmshow writhing Mexican jungle smoke covering my home town, as revealed by both American and European satellite sensors.  I am looking for the *prettiest* and *most graphically compelling* online picture of the 1998 Chiapas smoke plume.  This is defininitely one of those core Viridian graphic documents that we Viridians need to be meditating upon, in our ivied, lingering, contemplative fashion.  Please send me the address of the "most Viridian-looking" plume map or photo you can find on the web, and you will receive a chevron.(((What does this news mean?  Well, perhaps nothing much; it may be news to us humans, but El Nino is not an entirely new phenomenon, and presumably Brazil has been belching up natural carbon for millennia.  But not, perhaps, with today's unprecedented levels of psychotic enthusiasm, where vast swathes of dying jungle might conceivably auto-alter the planet climate, in a shrieking biofeedback, in a dysfunctional Gaian auto-da-fe'.  Let's just bookmark this one as a small but distinct possibility:  we could cease all human C02 emission tomorrow, and still find ourselves forced to spend the next thousand years trying to keep Mother Nature from ripping her hair out and immolating herself.)))    