Subject:  Viridian Note 00007:  Floods 2Key concepts:  Floods; unnatural disasters; safetychecklists; recovery procedures;  literary criticismAttention Conservation Notice:  A continuation of Note00006; grimly accurate; bureaucratically thorough;contains tedious, gritty minutiae about one of life'sworst experiencesSources:   University of Minnesota Extension Service HomePageLinks:http://www.extension.umn.edu/Documents/K/A/afterflood.html(((My comments are in triple parentheses == bruces)))Safety Rules and Recovery Procedures After a NaturalDisaster  1. See that your family is safe from flood crests, fire,or falling  buildings.  2. Cooperate fully with local authorities, rescue squads,and local Red Cross chapters.  3. Help locate shelter, food, clothing, transportation,medical supplies, and medical help for victims.  4. Obey health regulations for personal and communityprotection against disease epidemics. Report anyviolations.(((The  problem of looters rarely receives mention, even thoughlooters are omnipresent in post-disaster situations.  (The mosteager and immediate looters are children.)  It is simply*assumed* that all citizens are cooperative, fully socialized,responsible Samaritans.  Until #4 that is, when they are suddenlyurged to become vigilant informants against health  violators.Such is life when authority breaks down ==  full of upbeatpretense.))) 5. If premises have been flooded, flush plumbing fixtureswith buckets of water to be sure they are open. Havehealth authorities inspect sanitary disposal systems.Water may have backed up into the septic tank, which inturn backs up into the plumbing system. This could be ahealth hazard.(((The gush of one's own sewage is one of many small humiliations;but fail to deal with this, and you risk dysentery or worse.)))  6. Do not use water from private supply until healthauthorities have tested it. Boil drinking water 10 minutesor chlorinate by adding 1 teaspoon chlorine bleach pergallon of water.  7. Do not use food that has come in to contact with floodwaters. Some foods can be salvaged if properly packaged.Consult local health officials if in doubt.(((Good advice.   Now imagine yourself in a situationwhere these "health authorities" and "local healthofficials" are corrupt, absent, drowned, or simplynonexistent.  Though CO2 is mostly an industrial G7emanation, the effects are worst in areas where the worldremains most nearly natural.)))  8. Sanitize dishes, cooking utensils, and foodpreparation areas before using them.  (((A BelleEpoque sees no difficulty in *finding* food aftera disaster.))) 9.  When entering damaged buildings, use flashlights only,not matches, torches, or any open flame. Watch for nails,splinters, holes in walls or floors, wet or fallingplaster, undermined foundations, and gas leaks. 10. Do not use electrical system until it has been checkedby an electrician.  (((Presumably electricians are thickon the ground in your area.))) 11. Wait until any flood waters are below basement levelbefore trying to drain or pump the basement.  (((Healthhazards, bad water and personal ruination don't makepeople any brighter.))) 12. Start clean-up as soon as possible. Thoroughly dry andclean house before trying to live in it. Delay permanentrepairs until buildings are thoroughly dry.  ((("Demandthe Impossible" == Situationist International))) 13. Control rodents and insects.  (((Before they controlyou.))) 14. Remove sediment from heaters, flues, and motors beforeusing  them. To speed drying, start stoves and furnaces assoon as they have been checked for safety.   (((Removingsediment from a motor must be an interesting process,especially in a design world where more and more big-ticket items are impossible to open or service.))) 15. Take all furniture and rugs outdoors to dry.  ((( A handypractice for those nonexistent looters.))) 16. Dry and air bedding, clothing, and rugs as soon aspossible to prevent mildew. 17. Set priorities. Accomplish most important tasks first,and avoid physical over-exertion.  (((It's very human to"set priorities" as task number 17, when you're alreadyworn out from labor.))) 18. Be sure children are safe and are being cared for atall times. Never leave young children alone or allow thanto play in  damaged buildings or areas that might beunsafe.  (((The rain falls on young and old alike, butsurely the author of this superior injunction has nevertaken charge of young children.  A wrecked house is the verydefinition of attractive nuisance, and there's no bettertime to escape your parents than when they're losingeverything they own.))) 19. Give special attention to cleaning children's toys,cribs, playpens, and play equipment. Boil any items, for10 minutes, that a toddler or baby might put in his mouth.Discard stuffed toys, plastic toys, waterlogged toys, andnon-cleanable toys.  (((A plethora of Freudian trauma hereas parents ritually destroy the child's most prizedpossessions.))) 20. Keep chemicals used for disinfecting, and poisons usedfor insect and rodent control, out of the reach ofchildren.  (((You may be in a major disaster, but thatdoesn't make you bulletproof to life's many other smallerhazards.  In fact, you are worse off now, because you have noattention to spare.))) 21. Wear protective clothing on legs, arms, feet, andhands while cleaning up debris. Wear rubber gloves whilescrubbing flood-damaged interiors and furniture.  (((Andsince we'll be spending weeks on end in garb like this,it's time for the Viridian couturier to make post-disasterclothing that *looks and feels better.*)))Bruce Sterling (bruces@well.com)