Subject:  Viridian Note 00057:  Extinct MegafaunaKey concepts:  involuntary parks, war zone theory,game preserves, prehistoric extinction catastrophes, landscape alteration, American megafauna Attention Conservation Notice:  Could provoke severe cognitive dissonance in devotees of "Nature."From: steffen@ems.org^^^^^^^^^^^^^^***** (Alex Steffen)Source: William K. Stevens, New York Times"The West of Lewis and Clark may not have been so pristine'Buffer zones' between tribes seen as early game preserves"by William K. Stevens; The New York Times(...)    "Fond tradition pictures the plains and mountains of the Lewis and Clark era as a nature untouched by humans and apart from them: a sort of original realm of the wild, undisturbed and eternal. Many experts, however, have long since abandoned that vision.    "Today they see humans as longtime major players in nature's grand drama, and Native Americans among the main ecological actors of the old West (...).    "Now, citing as evidence the marvelously detailed journals of Captains Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, some scientists are proposing that even Indian warfare played a critical ecological role, by regulating and maintaining both the numbers and distribution of bison and other big animals of the West before descendants of Europeans settled it.   "Basically, according to this 'war zone' theory, Indian hunters were so proficient that in an individual tribe's homeland, populations of big game such as bison and elk seriously declined and in some cases disappeared. But in several big buffer zones between warring tribes, where hunters were loath to spend much time lest their enemies attack them, big game found more safety and flourished.    "These no-man's-lands functioned, in effect, as game preserves and may have kept the plains bison and other big animals from being hunted to extinction well before Europeans arrived.     "Not everyone agrees wholly with the theory. But the spotlight it casts on humans' impact on the pre-Columbian landscape also highlights one of the major conceptual problems facing present-day efforts to restore and conserve 'natural' ecosystems: What target should be aimed at? Should the goal be to maintain nature as nearly as possible in the state it was in before the ancestors of the Indians came to America many millenniums ago? Or to its state just before Europeans appeared on the continent? Or to some other state altogether?     "The war-zone theory is laid out in the February issue of the journal Conservation Biology by Paul Martin, a paleoecologist at the University of Arizona, and Christine Szuter, editor-in-chief of the University of Arizona Press. Martin says the theory could partly explain why bison, elk, deer and bears escaped the fate of other, even bigger North American animal species that became extinct 13,000 years ago.    "These included, among others, mammoths, mastodons, camels, giant sloths, tapirs and predators that depended on them, like giant short-faced bears, a giant wolf called the dire wolf and the saber-toothed cat.    "The bison is the largest surviving life form in North America, and Martin is the chief advocate of the view that the earlier vanished species of megafauna, as they are called, were hunted to extinction in a continentwide 'blitzkrieg' lasting several centuries by human hunters who had migrated to North America from Siberia 15,000 years ago or more.    "'The land had been stripped of most of its native megafauna through human influence' long before Lewis and Clark appeared on the scene, Martin and Szuter write. And except for the influence of humans, they say, much larger populations of the surviving bison, elk and deer would have greeted the white explorers.(...)    "For his part, Martin advocates the establishment of some nature preserves where the pre-Indian natural world might be re-created as closely as possible. African or Asian elephants, for instance, might stand in for the extinct mammoths, enabling scientists to see something of how the pre-human North American landscape functioned ecologically."(((bruces remarks:  This is certain to become a more popular theory, as the massive extinctions in our own time weigh more and more heavily on our conscience.  If the biggest and most photogenic American animals were all snuffed by migrating Siberians 15,000 years ago, it rather lets us off the hook concerning the imminent demise of the blue-tongued mango vole.  As for the timid half-step of introducing Asian elephants to the American steppelands, why stop there?  It's time for a serious effort to thaw out frozen Siberian mammoths, and do some full-scale, Dolly-the-Sheep-style, genetic restoration activity.)))Alex SteffenProgram DirectorEnvironmental Media ServicesWestern States Officesteffen@ems.orghttp://www.ems.org