Subject:  Viridian Note 00005:  Viridian AestheticsKey concepts:  Viridian aesthetic; distributed networks; mobiles; Alexander Calder (1898-1976)Attention Conservation Notice: This is art criticism.  There are over 900 words of it.Sources:  an original compositionLinks:  www.sfmoma.org/EXHIB/calder.index.htmlwww.nga.gov/exhibitions/caldwel.htmThere are two approaches to the problem of establishing a Viridian aesthetic:  the top-down approach, and the bottom-up.  The top-down method consists of issuing historical analogies, broad statements of principle,  sweeping aphorisms, and so forth, and trawling these verbal devices over the landscape in the hope that they will net something useful.     The bottom-up approach relies on assembling specificexamples, whose aggregate might suggest an  emergentfuture sensibility.   Since we Viridians have an expiration date looming, we will try both approaches at once.  Our first candidate for specific analysis, the first tree in our Viridian forest as it were, is the "mobile," invented  by twentieth-century artist Alexander Calder.      Following  our "underside-first" principle, we will start by listing  the aspects of Calder's mobiles which are NOT of a  Viridian sensibility.  Only then will we relate the  aspects which seem to have promise for the early 21st century.NON-VIRIDIAN ASPECTS OF CALDER'S MOBILESAlexander Calder is by no means a contemporary artist.  He was born a full one hundred years ago and  died  in the 1970s.Mobiles have two basic elements: colored cut-out shapes, and the jointed network of stiff wires that attach them.  Calder's shapes are flat and metallic, and generally painted in Mondrian-like, industrial, primary colors.Calder sometimes employed gimmicky, dated shapes reminiscent of bad Space Age coffee-tables.Calder sometimes attached mobile elements to representational objects, such as wire-framed fish and performing seals. Compared to the eerie majesty of the best abstract mobiles, this overly cute, toylike practice gives one a cloying sensation.Desktop and floor-mounted "stabiles"  are much less visually effective than air-swarming, ceiling-hung mobiles. Unless that is, the stabiles are built on a monumental scale, so that they can loom astoundinglyover the viewer.The movements of mobiles are determined by laws of gravity and local air currents, rather than some more sophisticated interchange among the moving elements.As art objects, mobiles are somewhat difficult to assess, because they are both sculpture and performance.  They present different visual experiences under different environmental circumstances.VIRIDIAN ASPECTS OF CALDER MOBILESThey were invented and built by a world-class avant-garde artist with a degree in mechanical engineering.Calder mobiles are strongly biomorphic in both shape and motion.They are thriftily built of cheap, recycled materials.Mobiles move silently and tirelessly through the use of ambient, renewable energy.Mobiles are sensitive indicators of local environmental conditions.Mobiles scale up well, although the truly colossal mobiles require some modest aid from electric motors.The term "mobile" was coined by Marcel Duchamp, a rather sphinxlike, timeless figure.Thanks to Calder's iterative balancing technique, a mobile's simple network contains a great deal of subtle embedded judgement.  Thanks to this, the movement of a mobile is not mechanically repetitive, but pleasantly  lifelike and unpredictable.Calder mobiles are distributed, collaborative networks in action.Although mobiles can be quite large in volume, even monumental, they are very sparing in their use of materials.  They are dependent on open space, voids, and transparency; less mass, more data.Mobiles have a life-affirming sense of humor.  It's hard to imagine a grim, fanatical mobile.CONCLUSION.There has been little formal innovation in Calder mobiles in recent decades.  They remain well-known as one of the few art forms invented by an American artist (though he had to go to Paris to do it).  Mobiles have always enjoyed a cult following, but in terms of technique they have become a Modernist backwater.    However, there exists the possibility of profound advancement in the design and  construction of mobiles.    Calder himself built his mobiles with string and tinsnips, snipping a bit here and there and shortening the wire until he felt he had the balance right.  It would not  seem difficult to automate this hands-on process through computer-based balancing algorithms.  This offers the attractive prospect of monumental CAD-CAM mobiles containing hundreds or thousands of perfectly balanced, interacting elements.    Mobiles could become vastly more sensitive and responsive if they abandoned the wire and sheet-iron of the 1930s. Thermosensitive wire and polymer might change color and movement with temperature.  Humidity-sensitive plastics might be useful.  Ultralight mobiles of foam and cellulose might be colorful and sturdy, yet almost float in air.    In near-term cultural conditions, mobiles could profoundly change their meaning. Our society is obsessed with networks and their internal balances and struggles, while Calder's era was analog, mechanical and pre-cybernetic.  Mobiles make far more sense today than they did in the 1930s.  The "network aesthetic" of mobiles suggests a Viridian equivalent for the Modernist "machine aesthetic."     A Viridian mobile made of silicon circuit-plates and data wiring would be an objective-correlative for the Net.   Such a device could be built to any scale, and could display any number of sophisticated responses to various aspects of its environment ==  it might, for instance, move in response to passing network traffic, rather than air currents.  A 21st-century silicon mobile might compute its own changing internal states of balance while simultaneously absorbing and deploying solar power.  There are a host of possibilities here, for this art-device would have all the protean capacities of a digital network.     Such a mobile could be programmed to behave in sophisticated, unprecedented ways, simply impossible during the twentieth century. Calder's mobile would no longer be a Modernist art object, but rather a new medium.Bruce Sterling (bruces@well.com)