Subject:  Viridian Note 00020: Energy Reform, the Swedish "Solution"Key concepts:  energy politics, nuclear power, Sweden, German GreensAttention Conservation Notice:  It's political analysis.  There are over 1,100 words of it.Source:  Austin American-Statesman, Sunday, November 22, 1998;  Los Angeles Times wire serviceLinks: http://www.gruene.de/Entries in the "Big Mike" Viridian Design Contest:http://www.pinknoiz.com/graphics/bigmike.gifhttp://www.spaceways.de/BigMike/Mike.htmlhttp://weber.u.washington.edu/~r1ddl3r/bigmike.htmlhttp://powerbase-alpha.com/bigmikehttp://rampages.onramp.net/~jzero/http://www.well.com/conf/mirrorshadeshttp://www.57thstreet.com/viridian/http://www.ioc.net/~bini/bigmike.htm"Sweden's nuclear plants hum despite closure vote" by Carol J. Williams, Los Angeles Times(((Ms. Williams' article has been heavily edited by the Viridian moderator, whose comments are in the customary triple parentheses.)))    "STOCKHOLM, Sweden == When Swedes voted in 1980 to shutter their nuclear power plants, their decision helped set the pace for judgements across Europe that the energy source, though limitless and affordable, posed too great a risk for the densely populated continent."    (((One always enjoys a lead-line that blandly proclaims at least three highly debatable assertions.)))   "But the environmental trailblazers have lost their way.  Eighteen years after the referendum that condemned this country's 12 reactors to the ash heap of industrial history, the full dozen are up and running past one closure deadline after another."    (((So much for the myth of Scandinavian efficiency.)))    "The emergence of a more leftist leadership from September's parliamentary elections may step up the pressure for fulfilling the voters' aging mandate.  But even the most staunch environmentalists see no chance for meeting the original 2010 objective for living nuclear-free."      (((It's really quite astonishing to see that Sweden, that legendarily tidy, public-spirited, well-organized, socialist democracy, can pass energy laws by popular fiat, and then retreat into utter technological impotence for 18 years.  This abject failure is really the sort of thing one associates with *American* energy policy, for instance, the Carter-era synthetic fuels program.)))    "Worse, say those who remain committed to the shutdowns, is that the phaseout plan once held up as a European model now stands as a can't-do precedent, shackling anti-nuclear campaigns elsewhere -- most notably in Germany, where the environmental Greens in September won a historic chance to share power."    (((We are now getting to the core of the agenda here: namely, the Germans.  Nobody is seriously concerned about Swedish energy policy and energy law (least of all, apparently, the Swedes).   But the Germans are a G-7 major industrial power. Their land area recently almost doubled, and they just legitimated a couple of million guest-worker citizens.  Furthermore, the Germans have a brand-new Red/Green "Pink Tide"  government, run by former 60s-era student radicals.   This is the first time that any Green party anywhere has ever had its mitts on the levers of genuine power.   German politics are now the most interesting Viridian politics in the world.  We Viridians have a lot of worthy matters demanding our attention, and we do not want to hear or publish anything about the USA's ludicrous domestic politics, which at this point in time do not bear serious consideration.  However, we are highly open to informed commentary about the new *German* politics.)))    "The anti-nuclear issue is now burning hottest in Germany, where a coalition of Social Democrats and Greens emerged from the Sept. 27 election that ended the 16-year reign of Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his nuclear-friendly conservative government.     "German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder agreed last month to push the Greens' anti-nuclear agenda, with a promise to open talks within the next year on a phaseout timetable with the private operators of Germany's 19 nuclear plants.     "However, Schroeder hinted that some reactors will be allowed to operate through their normal life span == a caveat that could keep nuclear plants running in Germany for 45 years."     (((And why stop there?  The *remnants* of those nuclear power plants should require careful attention indefinitely.)))    "The Greens wanted an eight-year phaseout of nuclear energy, which supplies 30 percent of Germany's power.  Schroeder and the Social Democrats have argued that a minimum of twenty years will be needed."     (((Swift reform of thirty percent of a nation's power supply is indeed a bold goal.   It would be interesting to learn if any other  group on earth is making similar proposals (and meaning them).  At the Rio meeting, as a striking counter-example, the USA wept hot public crocodile tears at the scary prospect of having to live up to its own (very modest) Kyoto agreement.)))      "Germany's nuclear industry warned of dire economic consequences from any swift renunciation of nuclear power.  Shuttering Germany's nuclear plants and replacing their output will cost hundreds of billions of dollars and eliminate 40,000 jobs (...)    (((The classic argument for the status quo == as if the need to *rebuild* all that lost energy capacity  couldn't possibly *create* any jobs.)))     "In Sweden, arguments for delaying the shutdown are similarly related to concerns about who will pay the tens of billions of dollars required to go nuclear-free. (...)"  (((Who paid the tens of billions of dollars required to go "nuclear-unfree?"  It'll be the same people, you can pretty well count on that.  Why even bring up the matter?  It's a red herring.)))         "Ceasing production of nuclear energy... would force Sweden to import costly wind-generated power from Denmark, polluting fossil-fuel energy from Russia and Eastern Europe, and, most hypocritically, nuclear-generated power from European countries with often less-reliable plants."     (((So much for the Swedish solution -- it leads only to the unspeakable horror of giving money to Danes with windmills.  The Viridian approach must be different. We must aim to cut these problem off at the knees.  Those  "hundreds of billions of dollars" are an invested weregild of titanic proportions.  The twentieth century power-generation oligarchy is a protection racket, so deeply embedded in society that no mere law will ever dig it loose.  Why imagine that you can dig yourself out by giving conscience money  to political action groups, when every month, without fail, you sign over hundreds of deutschmarks, pounds and.or dollars to electrical utilities?      (((The power generating and distribution structure has to be outflanked and technologically undercut.  It must be obsolesced.   Picket signs can't do this, and neither can parliaments.  It has to be tackled on its own ground and reduced to profit-free rust.  This must happen, and *will* happen, in much the same way that Microsoft software undercut IBM hardware, and Internet undercut postal telegraph and telephone monopolies.  New energy systems have to creep into society with the painless speed and ease of fax machines and cellphones.  That is the way in which techno-economic monoliths of this order and influence can be successfully demolished.   The political agitation and organization route is the Swedish route.  You preach the sermons to an informed and concerned electorate, who go into the booths and vote, and the monoliths that run your desk lamps and electric toothbrushes squat there in bland defiance of the public will for eighteen solid years --  and counting.  Does anyone imagine that Sweden's nuclear plants will shut down until they are replaced by something cheaper, cleaner and better?  I proclaim unto you:  they will not.)))Bruce Sterling (bruces@well.com)