Subject:  Viridian Note 00006:  FloodsKey concepts:  Floods; unnatural disasters; safety checklists; recovery procedures;  literary criticismAttention Conservation Notice:  Grimly accurate; contains tedious, gritty minutiae about one of life's worst experiences; comes in two partsSource:   University of Minnesota Extension Service Home PageLinks:  http://www.extension.umn.edu/Documents/K/A/afterflood.htmlThe University of Minnesota's Extension Service has been kind enough to publish a very extensive web document about the situation one faces after a flood.    Global warming does not mean merely that the globe gets warmer.  Climatic patterns also become more erratic.  This means anomalous rainfall and more floods.  This summer there was an area the size of Europe underwater in Asia.  As I type this, a Category 5 hurricane, the fourth-largest every recorded, approaches much-suffering Mexico, bearing storm surge and flood.  My own home town was copiously flooded just last week.    Floods are one of the consequences of global warming that are most likely to directly affect  your home, your business, your possessions, your loved ones, your city, your nation, your economy.  Those of you who have never experienced or seen a flood are increasingly likely to do so.    Floods are very exciting to watch (which is why young children often die in them).  They are also very disorienting (which is why old people often die in them).   People who safely resist the exhilirating drama of a flood will survive, to find themselves dealing with its many tedious and dispiriting consequences.    This is where the Viridian sensibility comes in.  We're not particularly interested in the brief spectacular period of the flood proper.  But we're very interested in what a 21st century society will feel like, and act like, as it experiences repeated, widespread episodes of "flood recovery."    The Minnesota "After the Flood" document suggests useful tool kits, and gives all manner of handy hints on drying, ventilation, personal safety, insurance documentation, home repair -- everything from mildewed wallpaper to portable toilets: 10,253 words.   I will briefly excerpt this document in two Viridian Notes, and subject it to literary criticism. My comments are in triple parentheses.(((The opening table of contents conveys the long-lingering aroma of the flood-recovery experience.)))After the Flood     Safety Rules and Recovery Procedures After a Natural Disaster     Restoring Electrical Service After a Flood  (((The very first order of business is to renew CO2 consumption.)))     Disposing of Sewage and Garbage (((Floods are unexcelled at transforming your possessions into "sewage" and "garbage."  That which does not wash away is often ruined.)))      Priorities for Clean-Up and Repair  (((Flood recovery is a very big job.  It is a major life trial.  Make a list first.  Make *several* lists.)))     Supplies and Equipment for Home Clean-Up (((We learn that these are rubber gloves, boots, buckets, crowbars, hammers, screwdrivers, sponges, scrub brushes, garbage bags, brooms, shovels, hoes, wheelbarrows, washtubs == and so on.)))     Cleaners and Disinfectants  (((In traditional societies, floods were commonly followed by plagues.   This time-honored principle will still hold true in global areas short of cheap disinfectant.)))     Mildew-Removing Procedures  (((Various damp-happy microorganisms will attack both your health and your possessions.)))     Checking Damaged Buildings  (((You might wade free of rising water, but having a flood-wrecked house fall on you is quite a different matter.  Electrocutions and gas explosions are also lively possibilities.)))     Cleaning and Repairing Flooded Basements     Finding and Repairing Leaks in Roofs     Getting Rid of Flood Odor  (((Lingering stenches are the very signature of the Greenhouse Effect.)))     Opening Flooded Windows     Replacing Broken Window Panes     Cleaning Flooded Floors And Woodwork     Treating Warped And De-Laminated Floors     Drying Walls     Cleaning Interior Walls     Repairing Exterior Siding     Patching Plaster     Installing Wallboard     Installing Paneling     Wallpapering(((You can struggle free of destitution and chaos in a matter of days -- but those last eleven items show that it's a long, long march back to conventional, G-7 style domestic reality.)))Bruce Sterling (bruces@well.com)))