Subject: Viridian Note 00052:  Human-Assisted Wildlife MigrationKey Concepts: Emergency global  heat strategy; multinational ecostructures; Post-Pleistocene landscape designs; totemic ambassadors; distributive intellect; decentralized aesthetic appreciationAttention Conservation Notice: Peter Warshall, editor of Whole Earth Review, wrote us this Note.  You're not likely to find a Viridian screed more "whole-earthy" than this one.Entries in the Viridian Teakettle Design Contest:http://www.stewarts.org/users/stewarts/teakettl.htmlhttp://www.dnai.com/~catnhat/teapots.htmhttp://www.interlog.com/~shamann/This contest ends March 20, 01999.From: pwturtle@well.com*  (Peter Warshall) Sources: Among others, Whole Earth magazine's issue on modern landscape ecology (Number 93). Many net sites for groups (see issue) that monitor greenhouse changes and impacts on our extended selves == the animal kingdom.Email becomes ecological. Ecostructures equal infrastructures. Prophesy includes Monarch butterflies, jaguars, unlimited ducks, and a sub-movement == the Cerulean Movement. Beauty and paying attention lead to conservation.Citizen science is already happening. Kids and oldsters are tracking the great heating of the planet by tracking NAFTA zoology. Monarch butterflies that move from Canada to Michoacan are tracked by kids and volunteers who tell who's arrived or departed on the web. They spot the hottest spots where the milkweeds (Monarch fueling stations) have gone extinct and fragmented the tri-national corridor.     They monitor the results of the World Trade Organization (without saying it). So when the US stops genetically engineered soybeans from being labelled as such, and GE soybeans spread through the soy/corn belt, and milkweed in the fields or along the roadways is herbicided with RoundUp, they know, and the news surges over the net.     The same for ducks that travel from Canada to Mejico. And wood warblers.    But, global warming is sending the subtropical critters north. Armadillos in Texas, jaguars in New Mexico/Arizona, elegant trogans, coatimundis...all heading north with the heat.    Ecostructure is to nature, what infrastructure is to humans. It's the corridors and composition of the corridors that help trees or animals move with the heat. Jaguars used to be as far north as the Grand Canyon. That mom and cubs are stuffed in New York, in the American Museum of Natural History (1905). Jaguars used to be in Louisiana. Now, with the heat and forest fires and clearcutting, they're heading north and need corridors.     So old fart ranchers and hunters and multiple-aged maniacal naturalists have tracked the ecostructure needed and are preparing for 2012 and beyond. Supplying a space to move that is Viridian, since jaguars and coatis have a hard time in sand dunes.    Add to this, the Cerulean Movement which knows that the greenhouse effect will raise the seas and mudflats and lagoons will drown. So, the NAFTA effect on shorebirds who will find few places to land and fuel up by pick, jab, and stab at spineless inverts. No ecostructure. Either they will become albatrosses or perish. The NAFTA critters include greywhales and sea turtles. They used to include steelhead and sea otters.    In short, the webbing of the Earth (ecostructure) parallels the webbing of the human invention (roads, wires). No college scientist nor the NSF can track these changes in grounded and oceanic ecostructure and movements. It's beyond the scope of satellites. Yet the non-humans carry the news. They are allies of the prophets. By believing in their intelligence, the future can be known. To do all this requires a distributive intellect and integrated decentralized observation network. Its only citizens in love with looking and feeding their love (an aesthetic if there is one) into the net that is cheap and joyful. A new viridian science that will allow focused finances to see the landscape breaks and gaps and heal them.    This movement too has an automatic end. Stop global warming, connect the dots, and end the movement.Peter Warshall, Whole Earth Quarterly1408 Mission AvenueSan Rafael, CA 94901 USAPhone 415-256-2800, ext. 224Fax 415-256-2808