Subject:  Viridian Note 00058: Grass GasKey concepts:  lawns, air pollution, organic compounds, crops, plant injury, biodiversityAttention Conservation Notice:  Provokes possibly needless eco-anxiety, then exacerbates it with parodic sarcasm.Source:  Article by Randolph E. Schmid, Associated Press.Austin American-Statesman, April 3, 01999."Cutting the lawn may add toxins to the air, study says"    "That sweet scent of a freshly mowed lawn may really be the smell of air pollution.     "Scientists studying the sources of chemicals in the air have found that injured grass gives off volatile compounds.      "'Wounding, cutting and drying of leaves and stems occur both naturally and by human activities.  Wound-induced and drying-induced (...) compounds are expected to be significant in the atmosphere,' a team of researchers says in a study scheduled to appear in a future issue of the journal Geophysical Research Letters.       "'In urban areas, lawn mowing by contribute to the total.... emissions and impact air quality,' the report says.  (...)       "'It just  doesn't seem likely to me that the smell of newly mown grass is toxic,' said Ray Fall of the University of Colorado, a biochemist and one of the researchers. (...)      "Yet, Fall said the team was surprised at the variety of chemicals released when crops were cut and during the drying process, including methanol, hexanal, acetaldehyde, acetone and butatone.  Some, such as acetone, can contribute to the formation of smog, the paper notes.       "The scientists estimate that cutting crops adds about 1.6 million tons of acetone to the atmosphere annually, compared with estimated total natural emissions of 8 million to 13 million tons. (...)      "'Cutting and drying organic material appears to be a significant global, and possibly regional, source of volatile organic compounds.  One that we think may not have been well accounted for before,' said Carlton Howard of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Aeronomy Laboratory in Boulder, in a telephone interview."(((bruces remarks:  to a darker, more suspicious frame of mind (my own), it seems *only too likely* that injured plants should give off "toxic" gases.  Plants are notorious for the fiendish ingenuity of their chemical defenses against herbivores.   Bad enough that we have to breathe this naturally!   Now, let us imagine the dire local effect of the mechanized lawnmower, which does not merely "cut" the lawn, but violently macerates all vascular plants into a reeking pulp!  This organic witches' brew combines with the vile greenhouse spew of the lawnmower's internal combustion engine, threatening the health of the homeowner and his family!   The obvious solution?  Abandon lawns!  Abandon that time-consuming, attention-hogging, watering, raking, fertilizing, and herbicidal spraying.   Embrace backyard biodiversity.  Remember: if you can smell it, it's settling into your lungs.)))