Subject: Viridian Note 00074: Browning the US Govt.Key concepts:  US Government energy consumption,Senate Republicans, Kyoto AccordsAttention Conservation Notice:  It's about sordid partisan infighting in American  domestic politics.Links: Alliance to Save Energyhttp://www.ase.org/Senator Thad Cochran, Republican from Mississippihttp://www.senate.gov/~cochran/Entries in the Viridian Couture Contest:None.  Everyone on Viridian List wears giveaway T-shirts from computer product companies.This contest expires July 21, 01999.(((In "Viridian Note 00071: Greening the US Govt" we devoted 1,600 words to President Clinton's laudable (if unilateral) effort to get the US Government to burn less CO2.  Predictably, this act did not pass unchallenged by Clinton's domestic opponents.)))(((First, some spin from the indignant "Alliance to Save Energy," who were really looking forward to that solar pork.)))"Senate Interior Appropriations Amendment Threatens Federal Energy Efficiency Initiative; Surprise Move Could Cost Taxpayers $1 Billion""WASHINGTON, June 25, 1999.  In a move described today as 'unbelievable' by President Bill Clinton, Sen. Thad Cochran (R-MS) inserted language into the Senate Interior Appropriations bill designed to block the implementation of President Clinton's sweeping executive order issued earlier this month requiring federal agencies to cut their energy use by 30 percent over the next decade.   "'Senator Cochran's amendment would put the fat back into government,' said David Nemtzow, president of the Alliance to Save Energy, a bipartisan coalition of business, government, environmental, and consumer leaders. President Clinton's recent Executive Order 13123, entitled 'Greening the Government Through Efficient Energy Management,' incorporated many of the recommendations contained in an Alliance to Save Energy report on how to cut energy waste in the federal government. The report outlines $1 billion worth of potential annual savings achievable through aggressive steps to improve energy efficiency in federal government facilities.    "The language on the Interior Appropriations bill was adopted on a voice vote by members of the Senate Appropriations Committee, which funds the Department of Energy (DOE). It would forbid the use of funds 'to study, develop, or implement procedures or policies to establish energy efficiency, energy use or energy acquisition rules or guidelines other than those based upon the provisions of the Energy Conservation Policy Act (EPCA) of 1975.'    "Sen. Cochran indicated in his remarks accompanying its introduction that it was meant to block the implementation of Clinton's executive order, which he described as a 'thinly disguised effort to implement the Kyoto Agreement.'    "'This kind of thing almost defies comprehension,' declared Nemtzow. 'Senator Cochran is attempting to turn back the clock 25 years on federal energy efficiency efforts with a surprise amendment to an Appropriations bill.'     "'Senator Jeff Bingaman (D-NM) and the entire Alliance to Save Energy will be mounting a full-court press to fix this bill on the Senate floor,' said Nemtzow. 'The executive order, if fully implemented, would make the federal government a model energy consumer == reducing air pollution and shrinking the federal government's utility bills by $1 billion a year. This misguided amendment would kill this effort == and do so at great expense to taxpayers. I am confident that Senate leadership will not allow it to stand.'"  (...)(((And now a few words on Viridian List from the Chief Executive of the United States.  Say what one likes about his personality or policies, Bill Clinton is a master of spin.  It's small wonder that Clinton's many political enemies fear and hate him so much.)))"Clinton Comments on Cochran Amendment"Excerpt of the remarks made by President Clinton to Presidential Scholars at Georgetown University, Washington. D.C., on June 25.    "Partisanship has even paralyzed the basic work of writing our spending bills, something we have to do here every year. Let me give you an example.  Not very long ago, I issued an order saying that the United States government would cut our greenhouse gas emissions coming out of our buildings by 30 percent over the next few years, to meet our responsibility to deal with the challenge of global warming.      "Now, you have to understand, this doesn't cost you anything. This saves you money. We're going to reduce our energy use so that we reduce our greenhouse gas emissions coming out of our facilities by 30 percent. It's a no-brainer. It's no money, nothing. The only people that lose are the people that won't be pumping electricity to us.    "Unbelievably enough, just yesterday, a Senate committee voted to largely block my executive actionto cut the government's emissions by 30 percent == anaction that would save you $750 million a year.     "Now, I think I can stop that. But it's an example of what happened when adults with responsibility fall into small-time wrangling and even want to stop things that are 100 percent good and not controversial."(((In our next Viridian Note, we will examine why Senator Thad Cochran is so bitterly opposed to Kyoto that he will snap and gnash at things that even *look* like Kyoto.)))O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=OI BURN FILTH TO STAY ALIVEO=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O